Contact Student healthcare
You can always turn to Student healthcare if you need support because of something that is caused by or is affecting your studies. You can schedule an in-person appointment or have a meeting online or by phone. You get three free counselling sessions per calendar year, and if needed you can be offered additional sessions.
If something is not related to your studies, you should seek out the general healthcare services. If you’re unsure, contact Student healthcare for an initial assessment.
The University of Gothenburg has a procured student healthcare provider, which means that it’s the company
Feelgood
that you will be in touch with when you contact Student healthcare for support.


Examples of things that Student healthcare can help you with:
Stress management, for example if you feel that you can’t keep up with your studies or that you have procrastination issues.
Ergonomics and workload, for example muscle and joint pain during certain aspects of your studies.
Medical check-ups – please note however that you must check with your course or programme coordinator if you have access to medical check-ups.
Feelings of worry arising from or in connection to your studies.
If you're experiencing issues with public speaking, such as presentations or actively participating in seminars or group discussions.
Support if you’re involved in a case with the Disciplinary Board.
Examples of things that Student healthcare
cannot
help you with:
Stress management in your personal life, for example in relation to housing, family or private economy.
Investigations, for example regarding disability or various illnesses.
Medicine prescriptions.
Support regarding documented illnesses.
Support regarding milder illnesses, for example colds and flus.


You can contact Student healthcare (Feelgood) by email or by phone.
student.goteborg@feelgood.se
031-786 43 22 (Monday to Friday, 8 am to 5 pm)
If you have a Swedish personal identity number and BankID, you can use the Feelgood app. Download from
App Store
or
Google Play
.
Cancellations
Cancellations
must be made by phone or e-mail at least 24 hours before the scheduled visit. No-shows will be charged. To cancel, call 031-786 43 22 (on weekdays) or email
student.goteborg@feelgood.se
.
Address for scheduled in-person appointments
If you have a scheduled appointment, the address is Östra Hamngatan 26, 411 09 Göteborg.
Visiting hours are Monday to Friday, 8 am to 4 pm.


The provider of student healthcare services has access to the following personal data from Ladok: name, personal identification number, faculty, department, programme and/or freestanding course. This is so that the University of Gothenburg will have access to reports to be able to take the relevant active measures with regards to health, and to be able to see how the University's students are making use of different kinds of resources.
You can read more about the processing of personal data on the Student Portal.
Processing of your personal data
All visits and contact with the provider of student healthcare services are recorded.
According to law, the provider is responsible for patient records and all patient records must be archived for a minimum of 10 years.
As a student you have the right to access your patient records. To do this, contact the current provider of student healthcare services. If you would like to request records for visits made to Feelgood, you will then contact Feelgood directly by e-mail at
student.goteborg@feelgood.se
or by phone at 010-810 81 92.
If you would like to request records for visits made to the previous provider of student health services Akademihälsan, please contact the Regional Archive (Regionarkivet) – information in Swedish at the link below.
Beställ kopia via e-tjänst för privatperson hos Regionarkivet


Self-guided resources and other types of support
There are lots of resources that you can use on your own, when you feel that you need it. There are also organisations and functions other than Student healthcare that can provide support, both within and outside the University.
studenthälsa.se
– information, events, webinars and self-guided resources about student health. For all students in Sweden.
Videos on study technique on GU Play
Service and support
– a section of the Student Portal guiding you to service and support that the University offers. For example, you can get help developing your academic language and writing or read about strategies for planning your studying.


SAHA – Stress and health advice
AntiStress app
Resources in Swedish:
Hjälplinjen: nationell stödlinje för psykisk hälsa
Din psykiska hälsa: Ung vuxen
Utbildningskliniken vid Göteborgs universitet
Studieenheten vid Fontänhuset Göteborg
– för dig som är student med psykisk ohälsa


Lifeyle analysis: Test your habits at alexit.se
The Alchohol Help (Alkoholhjälpen)
Youmo – about sex, health and relationships
Resources in Swedish:
Idrott, motion och friluftsliv i Göteborgs stad
Hälsolots
Livsstilsanalys: Testa dina vanor
Respons alkoholrådgivning i Göteborgs stad
Alkoholhjälpen
Alkoholprofilen
Behandlingsgruppen för drogproblem i Göteborgs stad
Droghjälpen
Spelberoendeteamet Göteborg
umo.se – om sex, hälsa och relationer


At the University Church you can talk about everything that is going on in your life, whenever you need to. You are welcome regardless of your beliefs. The counselling is free of charge, no records are kept and those who work at the University Church are bound by a duty of confidentiality.
GU Chaplaincy is the name for community promotion activities with a focus on existential health that are conducted in collaboration between the University Church and the University of Gothenburg (GU). With its unique expertise, the University Church is a resource for staff and students at GU.
University Chaplaincy Gothenburg (svenskakyrkan.se)


Sick leave, student finances and insurance


As a student, you should report sick if you feel that you cannot study. Report sick on the first day to Försäkringskassan (the Swedish Social Insurance Agency) through their website or by phone. You must also contact your department to discuss how your studies will be affected by your sick leave. It is also important to contact your healthcare centre if you are sick for an extended period of time.
If you get sick on forsakringskassan.se


If you are receiving student aid, it is important that you notify CSN (the Swedish Board of Student Finance) about the change to your studies, for example that you are on sick leave.
CSN website in English


At the link below you can find information about insurance for international students and how to report an injury or accident.
Insurance


Health services in Sweden


Have a look at this recorded webinar on navigating the Swedish healthcare system:
Recorded webinar: Navigating the Swedish healthcare system (GU Play)
Read more about health services in Sweden in the boxes below.


The Medical Information Service, phone: (+46) 1177, is a 24-hour provider of free healthcare information and consulting. There are local medical care centres (Vårdcentral) all over Gothenburg.
Information about medical service at Vårdguiden's website


112 is the emergency number for ambulance, police and rescue, and fire brigade. You will be asked to explain what has happened and to state your location. There is an emergency room at Sahlgrenska University Hospital.


Non-prescription medication, such as aspirin and cough syrup, is sold at pharmacies and at some supermarkets, grocery stores and petrol stations. A doctor’s prescription is required for stronger medications such as antibiotics. These medications can only be obtained from a pharmacy (apotek).


All medical districts have a dental clinic (Folktandvården), usually located in the same area as the medical care centre (Vårdcentral). There is also a wide range of private dentists. Dental care costs are partially subsidised if you are registered in the Swedish social insurance system.


The University of Gothenburg is participating in a study on students' mental health
Since November 2020 the University of Gothenburg has been participating in an international study on student mental health. The study is being conducted in several countries and is managed by Harvard University. In Sweden the study is managed by researchers att Uppsala University and the University of Gothenburg is one of several participating higher education institutions in the country.
At the participating higher education institutions in Sweden, all students studying their first term of a programme at first-cycle level will be offered the chance to participate in the study. The offer is sent via e-mail.
The purpose of the study is to investigate students' mental health and which aspects are especially crucial for good mental health among students. The study also investigates different digital forms of support to see how they affect students' mental health. The University hopes that as many students as possible will wish to participate in order to contribute to our continued work surrounding student mental health.
Read more
The WHO World Mental Health International College Student (WMH-ICS) Initiative


Contact
Find you way on the University
Faculties and departments
Security at the University
Processing of your personal data
Accessibility statement
Cookie settings