Contact Servicecenter


Contact Form:
Support for students
E-mail
:
servicecenter@gu.se
Phone:
+4631 786 6500
Opening hours (incl. phone hours):
Monday 8am-4pm, Tuesday-Wednesday 8am-6:15pm, Friday 8am-2pm
Extra IT-support is avaliable at Servicecenter Pedagogen, Västra Hamngatan 25 on the following days:
August 25 and 26, 12am-4pm
August 31, 12am-4pm
September 1 and 3, 12am-4pm
September 7-8 and 10, 12am-4pm


Servicecenter can help you with
Servicecenter can help you navigate the University of Gothenburg -  our buildings as well as our organisation. If you don't know who to contact with a question, contact Servicecenter and we will guide you.
Servicecenter can also help you with:


The GU card is a multifunction card. It works as an access card, a library card at the University Library and for using the university printers.
You order your card in the GU card portal and choose a Servicecenter as your pick-up point
Read more about the GU card
List of approved ID documents when you pick up your GU card


The student account gives you access to the digital tools at the University of Gothenburg.
As an international student without a Swedish personal identity number, you must visit Servicecenter to activate your student account. If you are studying a distance course, please contact Servicecenter for further assistance.
Read more about the student account
List of approved ID documents when you pick up login details


In
Ladok
, you can generate a verifiable certificates of your results and registrations.
If you want a transcript with a signature, you can order it from Servicecenter.
Order a signed transcrip
t
Read more about registration, results and certificates


Servicecenter can help you with general informations about studying at the University of Gothenburg. We can also help you with contact details to study administration, study counsellors or other university functions that can help you with more specific questions.


In our for Servicecenters you can buy some University of Gothenburg promotional products such as water bottles, tote bags, notebooks and pens.
In Servicecenter, we also have display items of the full range of promotional products available in our webshop. You will find clothes, bags, umbrellas, gift items and much more.
Webshop for promotional products


Via Servicecenter, you can get access to some IT support. Servicecenter can help you to an extent and put you in contact with the university IT Support if further assistance is needed.
We can help you with:
Login and access to university tools and software Inloggning och åtkomst till universitetets tjänster och programvaror
Instructions for downloading university software
Access to the university wifi eduroam
MFA - multifactor authentication for access to your student email and other Microsoft tools
We cannot help you with:
Issues with your personal computer/phone/tablet
Updating your personal computer/phone/tablet
Installation of university tools and software on your personal computer/phone/tablet. We can give you instructions, but we cannot do it for you.
Extra IT-support is avaliable at Servicecenter Pedagogen, Västra Hamngatan 25 on the following days between 12am-4pm:
August 25 and 26
August 31
September 1 and 3
September 7-8 and 10


Servicecenter can help you with key pickup and drop-off. For other questions about your student accommodation, please contact studenthousing@gu.se.


Visit Servicecenter


There are four Servicecenter locations at the university. You do not need to be a student at the faculty to visit Servicecenter.
Servicecenter Haga
Address:
Sprängkullsgatan 19
Opening hours:
Monday 8am-4pm, Tuesday 8am-6:15 pm, Wednesday-Thursday 8am-4pm, Friday 8am-2pm
Servicecenter Medicinaregatan 20B
Address
: Medicinaregatan 20B
Opening hours:
Monday-Thursday: 8am-4pm, Friday: 8am-2pm
Servicecenter Näckrosen
Address:
Renströmsgatan 6
Opening hours:
Monday-Tuesday 8am-4pm, Wednesday 8am-6.15pm, Thursday 8am-4pm, Friday 8am-2pm
Servicecenter Pedagogen
Address:
Västra Hamngatan 25
Opening hours:
Monday-Thursday: 8am-4pm, Friday: 8am-2pm
Extra IT-support is avaliable at Servicecenter Pedagogen on the following days:
August 25 and 26, 12am-4pm
August 31, 12am-4pm
September 1 and 3, 12am-4pm
September 7-8 and 10, 12am-4pm


Contact
Find you way on the University
Faculties and departments
Security at the University
Processing of your personal data
Accessibility statement
Cookie settings