Assignment instructions
Before you start writing an assignment, it is important that you understand what the task is asking of you, and what is required of your submitted work.
Here are some tips about how you can approach your assignments:
Carefully read the assignment instructions and the questions that are asked.
If the assignment is a home exam, identify which course literature is relevant to the assignment.
Write down any thoughts and ideas that you have in a mind map.
Make sure you include what is requested.
Write an outline of your assignment with the main headings.
Write a draft based on your outline.
Schedule the work you need to do on your assignment until the submission date.
Set aside time to revise and edit your text.
Make sure you include everything specified in the assignment.


Task instructions often include verbs that tell you what you are expected to do. Understanding the meaning of these verbs is crucial as they indicate the requirements that need to be fulfilled in your text. Sometimes a verb can have a specific meaning in a particular subject. Ask your teacher to clarify the instructions if you feel they are unclear in any way.
Here is a list of verbs that usually appear in university assignments:
Analyse
means to examine something carefully, distinguish the individual parts and properties, and examine them one at a time to try to understand the whole based on the analysis of the individual parts.
Argue
means to make arguments for or against something, such as a certain theory or position, and support these arguments by relevant academic literature.
Characterise
means to describe the characteristics of, for example, a fact, a person, a text, or a piece of work.
Compare
means to examine something in relation to something else and describe similarities and differences between, for example, different concepts, theories, or texts.
Describe
means to give a detailed account of something by, for example, describing its properties and giving an overall picture of it.
Discuss
means to compare something from different perspectives and juxtapose different points of view.
Draw conclusions
means to present the consequences of certain facts or results and to clarify what can be understood based on analysis, discussion, argumentation, or reasoning.
Explain
means to give a detailed description or explanation of something.
Problematise
means to show the complexity of something, such as a position, phenomenon, or concept, by discussing what could make it a problem that requires a solution.
Reason
means to present a line of thought and explain that way of thinking.
Reflect
means to think about a phenomenon from a particular perspective and explain your thoughts and understanding.


‘Thinking writing’
‘Thinking writing’ is for yourself so that you can get started with writing. It is about putting your thoughts into words so that in the next step, you can develop them further.
‘Thinking writing’ can take the form of incomplete sentences, abbreviations, or quotations from the course literature that you want to use. You can use various sources for ‘thinking writing’, including assignment instructions, and your notes from lectures and the course literature.
It can be difficult to get started with writing if you are too focused on the finished text too early in the writing process. While writing your thoughts down, try to be as uncritical as possible about your writing. ‘Thinking writing’ helps you come up with what you want to say, and not how to say it.


You can use a mind map no matter where you are in the writing process. Making a mind map means creating an overview of something. It can be about finding out points that are included in assignment instructions. It can also be about focusing on a specific topic and coming up with ideas about it without overthinking.


The structure of an academic text
Academic texts are characterised by having a clear structure. On general level, this means texts have an introduction, body, and conclusion. Sometimes the shape of an hourglass is used to illustrate this structure.
Introduction
In the introduction, you present what the text is about. You can do this with phrases such as "The purpose is to discuss
..."
, or "In the text, I will argue for
..."
.  Such formulations prepare the reader for what the text will be about and makes it easier to read.
Body
In the body of the text, you follow through on the statements you made in the introduction. For example, you can present your arguments and develop your reasoning around them. A text's body consists of paragraphs describing and developing the topic introduced in the introduction. Here you weave in references to your course literature and other relevant sources that support your statements as well as any discussion you may have.
Conclusion
In the conclusion, summarise what you have done in the text. Remind the reader what the purpose of the text was by using phrases such as "The purpose was to ... ", or "In this text, I have described and discussed
..."
.


Academic texts are also structured with the help of well-thought-out paragraph organisation, topic sentences and conjunctions which connect the text together.


Theses and reports
Before completing your degree, you will probably write a comprehensive piece of work in the form of a thesis or report. Since there are different writing traditions, the structure of a thesis or report may differ slightly depending on the subject in which it is written and the type of research that needs to be done. However, most theses and reports have a common overall structure called IMRaD. IMRaD stands for Introduction, Materials and Methods, Results and Discussion. Some disciplines also include headings such as Background, Literature Review, and Theory.


In the introduction you narrow down the topic and state your research questions. Start by introducing the subject and clarifying the research area that you are doing your study in. Then describe the problem that needs to be investigated. Then you briefly describe how you approach the problem and what your research can contribute to the existing research area. The introduction should lead to the formulation of your aim and research questions.
The following questions can be used as a starting point when writing your introduction.
What is the problem you will investigate?
Why does the problem need to be investigated?
What has been written about the problem in the research literature?
Do any concepts or terms need to be defined and explained?
What arguments have been made about the problem? Do these arguments indicate contradiction or consensus?
Based on previous research, what still needs to be done to address the problem?
What aspect of the problem will you address in your study?
Write a draft of the introduction early. It gives your writing direction and makes it easier for you to focus and design your research in terms of a literature search, method selection, and material collection. Towards the end of writing your essay, you should revise the introduction so that it corresponds with how your study was actually carried out and what the results were.
The introduction can also include sections such as background, previous research, literature review, and theory. These can also be under their own headings.


Under the heading Previous Research or Literature Review, you review the sources that are relevant to your problem. Here you describe which sources you have used and put them in the context that you are researching. This means that you show how you relate to what has been done previously in your subject.
The following questions can be used as a starting point:
What issues have been previously investigated in the subject?
What perspectives have been highlighted?
What methods have been used?
With the review, you show the reader that you are familiar with the research area as well as how your study can contribute to existing research. The review also serves as a background for you to be able to discuss your own results in relation to previous research.
A basic principle is to give the most significant sources the most space in your text. Also, do not just list all the details from all your sources. Rather, think about what in each source is most important to address and what is most relevant to convey to the reader in your particular research context.
Theory
In the theory part, you put your research into a theoretical framework by defining and explaining key theories, concepts and terms. Here it is important to describe how and why you have chosen to use precisely these theories, concepts and terms in your particular study.


In the theory section, you put your research into a theoretical framework by defining and explaining key theories, concepts, and terms. Here it is important to describe how and why these theories, concepts, and terms support your study.


In the method section, it must be clear which method you have chosen, why you have chosen this particular method, and how you have used or adapted the method for the implementation of your study. You should clearly justify why the chosen approach is appropriate in relation to your question and your theoretical choice. Also, describe any disadvantages of the chosen method and point out why you still found the method appropriate for your study.
In the section on materials, you provide a detailed description of your selection of materials or data (for example, informants, texts, or observations). This includes information on how you went about collecting the material, which selection criteria were used, and in what form the material is available (for example, Word files, Excel files or statistics programs).


In this section, you report the results of your investigation. Structure the results based on your research questions, for example, according to themes or patterns you have identified.
Some general advice regarding results are:
Distinguish between results and analysis. Let the results stand for themselves and clearly state when you analyse your results. In other words, the results section is mainly for reporting your findings, so save the overall conclusions and discussion for the discussion section.
Use subheadings to show how you have structured the Results section.
Use figures, diagrams, and tables if they help your reader understand your results.


The results must be summarised, interpreted, and problematised in the Discussion section. The discussion often ends with you drawing conclusions and placing your study and its results into a larger context. The following questions may be helpful in structuring and writing your discussion:
What is the problem I have researched?
How did I address the problem in my study?
How are my results related to previous research?
How can I use my theoretical framework to explain my results?
What are the limitations of my research?
What should future research focus on?


References and reading tips
Bailey, S. (2015).
Academic Writing: A Handbook for International Students
(4.th ed.). Routledge.
Björk, L. & Räisänen, C. (1997).
Academic writing: A university writing course
(2.nd ed.). Studentlitteratur.
Blomström, V. & Wennerberg, J. (2021).
Akademiskt läsande och skrivande
(Andra upplagan ed.). Studentlitteratur.
Dysthe, O., Hertzberg, F. & Løkensgard Hoel, T. (2011).
Skriva för att lära: Skrivande i högre utbildning
(2., [rev.] uppl. ed.). Studentlitteratur.
Graff, G. & Birkenstein, C. (2014).
They say / I say: The moves that matter in academic writing
(3.rd ed.). Norton.
Redman, P. & Maples, W. (2017).
Good Essay Writing: A Social Sciences Guide
(Fifth ed., Sage study skills).
Strömquist, S. (2019).
Uppsatshandboken: Råd och regler för utformningen av examensarbeten och vetenskapliga uppsatser
(Sjunde upplagan ed.). Studentlitteratur.
Swales, J. & Feak, C. (2012).
Academic Writing for Graduate Students: Essential Tasks and Skills
(3., [rev. and expanded] ed., Michigan series in English for academic & professional purposes).


Learn more about generative AI by these recorded webinars on GU Play:
Generative AI and university studies
Generative AI and academic writing
Generative AI and academic reading
Generative AI and critical thinking
Three reasons not to use generative AI


Do you want to practice and develop your knowledge of Swedish? In the Language and grammar resource on Canvas, you can read about important language and grammar skills and take quizzes.
Practice Swedish language and grammar in Canvas


Contact
Find you way on the University
Faculties and departments
Security at the University
Processing of your personal data
Accessibility statement
Cookie settings