Study at the library
The libraries have open seating areas for group assignments. Study rooms for groups are available for reservation, as well as several PCs for students. Many of our libraries have silent reading rooms, and individual desks for students in need of a quiet workspace.
All you need for focused studies is available at the libraries, such as textbooks and access to other literature, as well as copiers and printers. Librarians are at hand to provide tips and advice on studying technique, information searching, and reference management.
At the libraries – what you can find and get help with
The libraries have generous opening hours, to allow you to study when it suits you.
The libraries and opening hours
Students at the University of Gothenburg studying at Chalmers' campus
As a student at the Faculty of Science and Technology at the University of Gothenburg, you can use both the University Library’s and Chalmers' study environments and library services.
Library services at Campus Johanneberg
Library services in Kuggen at Lindholmen


The Gothenburg University Library supports research and education at the Gothenburg University, by providing information resources and collections, publication and digitalisation services, and support within searching, evaluating and managing information.


Find in the collections
The majority of our collections are not available on our open shelves, but can be found online. Use our website to access our digital collections. Your student account is your key to our materials, which you can find using our search service. Information on how to borrow materials from the University library can be found on our website:
How your student account works
Search the library collections (Supersearch)
Access the library's digital collections off-campus
New student – get started with the library
Get started with the library as a distance student


Services and support
Search support for students
Our librarians offer search support, including assistance in evaluating and improving your search results, as well as guidance in relation to various reference systems.
Search support for students
Reference management with Endnote and Zotero
In addition, the library can assist you with reference management using the Endnote and Zotero software. Use the link below to find more information about times and locations for our demos, and learn how to download and use the programs.
Help with reference management in Endnote and Zotero
Services for persons with reading impairments
The University library offers extended assistance to students with reading impairments. This includes additional textbook formats, longer loan intervals for textbooks, and access to our reading studios.
Services for persons with reading impairments


Our librarians offer search support, including assistance in evaluating and improving your search results, as well as guidance in relation to various reference systems.
The Search, Read and Write guide


Lectures and workshops
Short talks for students – open lunch lectures
Each semester, the library hosts brief lunch lectures on strategies for studying, on how to search for and manage your references, and on academic writing. The lectures are held online via Zoom, with no registration required.
Short talks for students – open lunch lectures


Welcome to attend the University Library's open lectures, workshops and demonstrations.
See all events at the university library


New student
On the library’s website, we have compiled important information for new students. As well as access to course literature and study spaces, you can also get support with information retrieval and managing sources and references, and much more to help you develop your academic skills.
New students – get started with the library (ub.gu.se)


Distance student
On the library’s website, we have brought together everything you, as a distance student, need to know to get started with the library’s services and resources.
Distance students – get started with the library


Contact the library
You are welcome to contact the University Library with questions, thoughts and opinions. You can use our contact form, call us, chat with a librarian, or ask questions in our information desk in Zoom or on site.
Contact us


Contact
Find you way on the University
Faculties and departments
Security at the University
Processing of your personal data
Accessibility statement
Cookie settings