Planning
As a university student, it is easy to be overwhelmed by all the literature you need to read and all the tasks you need to carry out and complete at specific times. It is, therefore, a good strategy to make your own plan for the course or semester.
Here's how you can set up a strategic plan for your studies:
Get an overview of the course or semester schedule.
Find out which course literature needs to be read and by which date.
Familiarise yourself with examination assignments as early as possible and plan for submission dates.
Identify periods when your studies may be more intense, for example, just before sitting for exams or submitting your assignments, and make sure not to book too many other things then.
Find out where and when you work most efficiently.
Avoid things that can disturb your concentration and let those around you understand that you are busy.
Schedule reading sessions, writing sessions, and breaks.
Remember to set aside time for revision (before sitting your exams) and editing (before written submissions).
Read and write consistently and set small, realistic goals for your study days.
Reading and taking notes
It is strategic to read texts in different ways, depending on how you use them in your coursework. When you have a large amount of literature to familiarise yourself with, you need to find out what you need to read more thoroughly and what you just need to be familiar with.
A basic prerequisite for reading strategically is to clarify what the goal of reading is. Reading in preparation for a sit-down exam to remember most of the content differs from getting an overview of a text to orientate oneself in a topic. This, in turn, differs from reading purposefully with a focus on a specific issue, for example, when writing an essay.
Different ways to read


By scanning, you get a first impression of what a text is about. Depending on whether the text is a book or an article, you can scan by reading through:
the book cover and back text
the table of contents
the preface and introduction, which often presents the purpose of the text.
When it comes to research articles, scan by reading:
the abstract
the purpose and research questions
the conclusion.


By skimming, you become acquainted with the main content of a text. The purpose of skimming is to quickly process a larger amount of text to determine which sections need to be read more thoroughly.
Here's what you can do:
Read the table of contents.
Read the summary.
Read the headings.
Read the first and last paragraph of each chapter.
Read the first sentence of each paragraph, perhaps also the last.
Look for keywords, key phrases, and italicised text.
Look at pictures, diagrams, and tables.


Intensive reading is an in-depth, thorough way of reading intended to help you understand the content of a text at a detailed level. There are usually only particularly important chapters or articles that need to be read intensively. These may be those that your teacher has identified as central or that you have identified as important for a particular issue.
Some tips for intensive reading:
Identify and select keywords after each paragraph or page you read.
Write down keywords and numbers.
Focus on linking words – such as however, firstly, secondly, that is, on the contrary – to understand the relationships of ideas in the text.
Write question marks and exclamation marks that show your reaction to what you have just read.
Summarise the main ideas of each chapter or section you read.
Stop reading from time to time and reflect on what you have read.
Divide intensive reading into several, short reading sessions so that you can maintain concentration more easily.


Read selectively when looking to find specific information that you want to use. This can be especially useful when you are writing an essay. Selective reading involves reading only those parts of a text that are relevant to your specific purpose. You can identify such sections through tables of contents, chapters, and section headings, or indexes. Make sure that you fully understand the information you take away from selective reading, and that you represent the information accurately when using it out of context.


To review a text, return to the sections that you have marked as particularly important. Review what you have underlined, keywords you have noted, and other notes you have taken. Reflect on the content using questions such as:
What is the main idea of …?
What conclusions can you draw from …?
How is it related to other literature you have read?
What do you need to check or read more about?


Note-taking strategies
Taking notes is a strategy that you can use in many situations during your studies. Your notes can make it easier to remember what you have read in the course literature or listened to in your lectures and seminars. Taking notes also helps you formulate what you are learning, in your own words.
If you have taken notes while reading, you probably have a written record of detached words and phrases when your reading session is over. Try to gather and structure your notes by:
capturing the main content
identifying keywords, key concepts, and themes
reflecting on what you have written.
Summarise the notes that you have taken. Make sure you indicate where each idea is stated or described in the text you are summarising. You can use this summary to prepare for an exam or write a draft for an assignment.
Make a habit of noting the references of the texts that are the basis for your notes. Also, mark if you have quoted a source or if you have made a summary in your own words. It makes it easier for you to correctly cite your work when you later use the notes, for example, when writing an assignment.


Try to use these note-taking strategies when attending a lecture or seminar.
Before
: Read the literature in advance and write down any questions or comments that you may have. Find out what is expected of you, for example, during a seminar. Take notes that make it easier for you to contribute to the discussion.
During
: Taking notes whilst listening can make you listen more actively. Use your notes to ask questions and make comments.
After
: Summarise the content of the lecture. You can, for example, use the following phrases:
The lecture was mainly about ... but also addressed ...
Initially ... Then ...
The lecture ended with ...
What I mainly take with me from this lecture is ...
I still wonder about ...
I need to read more about ...


References and reading tips
Blomström, V. & Wennerberg, J. (2021).
Akademiskt läsande och skrivande
(Andra upplagan ed.). Studentlitteratur.
Dysthe, O., Hertzberg, F. & Løkensgard Hoel, T.
Skriva för att lära: Skrivande i högre utbildning
(2., [rev.] uppl. ed.). Studentlitteratur.
Rienecker, L. & Stray Jørgensen, P. (2018).
Att skriva en bra uppsats
(Upplaga 4 ed.). Liber.


Learn more about generative AI by these recorded webinars on GU Play:
Generative AI and university studies
Generative AI and academic writing
Generative AI and academic reading
Generative AI and critical thinking
Three reasons not to use generative AI


Contact
Find you way on the University
Faculties and departments
Security at the University
Processing of your personal data
Accessibility statement
Cookie settings