A long-term disability means an impairment that you have which has lasted longer than six months. For example, specific reading and writing difficulties/dyslexia, a neurodevelopmental disorder, mobility impairment, visual impairment or hearing loss. Students with mental health conditions can also access study support.
The study support provided is designed to suit your needs and can consist of various forms of adjustments in your studies. At the University of Gothenburg, approximately 2000 students receive study support, and they are studying at all levels of education (first, second and third cycle). Here, the term “student” also includes doctoral students.
Your course or degree certificate will not show that you have had study support during your studies.


When should I apply for study support?
You should apply for study support as soon as you have been admitted to the University of Gothenburg. If you have a more extensive disability or need educational interpreting, please contact us as soon as possible so that we have enough time to arrange what is necessary to meet your needs.
Instructions on how to apply for study support can be found further down the page.
Forms of study support
Your study support is designed by a coordinator at the Educational Affairs unit in conjunction with other people, such as teaching staff and study counsellors, involved in the programme or course you are studying.
Some forms of support can
be decided by the coordinator
; other forms of support can
be recommended by the coordinator
. Your department or examiner will then decide which recommendations you can be granted. The intended learning outcomes in the syllabus for your programme or course are what ultimately guide and determine which adjustments you can get.


Note-taking support
It can be difficult to listen to lectures while also taking notes. A fellow student can share their notes with you. This is usually done by e-mail. The student who is your note-taking support receives compensation for this from the University.
Enhanced library service
Enhanced library service means you get:
extended loan periods for course literature
the option to book one of the reading studios at the University Library which contain equipment such as screen reader and magnifier programs, text-to-speech software, spelling programs, scanners and printers.
Mentors
If you find it difficult to structure and plan your studies, you can get access to a mentor to support you in this
for a limited period of time
. The mentor is generally another student who has already progressed a bit in their studies and has developed good study technique.
The aim of mentoring is to help you find strategies for coping with your studies that you can use once the support has ended.
You can get help prioritising what is important right now, support in weekly planning, or help in clarifying assignments and course components. The mentor does
not
help with the content of texts, or with corrections or proofreading of your assignments.
Educational interpreting
Educational interpreting can mean sign language interpreting and real-time speech-to-text interpreting, or deaf-blind interpreting. Students can access this service for lectures, seminars and other study situations requiring interpreting. If you need interpreting, you should apply for study support in good time and discuss this need with the coordinator.


Adapted methods of assessment
The coordinator can recommend adapted methods of assessment based on your needs. Examples of recommendations are that you are examined separately instead of in a group or that you are examined orally instead of in writing. The examiner makes decisions on adapted methods of assessment.
Extended time for take-home examination and hand-in assignment
This support give you extra time to write a take-home exam or assignment.The examiner makes decisions on extended time for take-home examination and hand-in assignment.
Adaptations for invigilated written examinations
Examples of adaptations for invigilated written examinations are extended time, that you are permitted to sit in a smaller group and that you are allowed to write on a computer with software such as text-to-speech software and spelling programs. The examiner makes decisions on adaptations for invigilated written examinations.
Degree projects, placements and practical courses
When it is time to write up your degree project, complete a placement or complete and on-site practical course, we recommend that you contact the coordinator again if necessary. Together with your department, we can review the type of study support that you can receive.
Audio recording for personal use
You can get a recommendation that you should be permitted to make audio recordings for personal use. You must ask in advance and get a permission before you make an audio recording.
Support from a fellow student
You can get support from a fellow student, for instance to move equipment or for moving between different lecture halls or as an orientation support assistant.


Apply for study support
As soon as you have been admitted to studies at the University of Gothenburg, you can apply for study support. You make the application in NAIS, which stands for National Administration and Information System, where you can upload documents confirming your long-term disability.
You must have valid documentation
The University of Gothenburg is a public authority, and the coordinators for study support therefore need documentation that proves that you have a long-term disability in order to be able to make a decision to grant you study support.
The documentation must be written by a doctor, a
speech and language
pathologist
speech therapist or a clinical psychologist for example. Concerning specific reading and writing difficulties/dyslexia, the documentation may also be written by a
special needs teacher
special education teacher. The study support coordinators do not carry out any investigations themselves
to
determine
that
you have a disability or for illnesses. If you experience ill health caused by your studies, please contact Student Health Care.
Here are examples of what documentation you need to include:
h
ow long you have had the disability or had contact with the health care system for your condition
d
ate of the investigation or contact with the health care system
h
ow long the impairment in your functional
capacity
is expected to last
d
escription of the disability and how it affects you
.
Decisions on study support granted by other universities cannot be used as documentation to prove your long-term disability.
Applying for and being granted study support


You apply for study support in the NAIS system. Documentation proving your long-term disability must be appended to your application.
www.nais.uhr.se
If you have a protected identity, your first step must be to contact a coordinator, who will help you with your application.  You find contact information on the bottom of this page.


Once your application has been registered, a coordinator will contact you. They may get in touch to book a meeting, ask questions about your support, or let you know that your Nais certificate is ready.


The coordinator summarises the support in a written certificate in NAIS (also known as a NAIS certificate) containing decisions and/or recommendations on study support for you.
You download the certificate yourself in NAIS.


Once you have received your written certificate, please contact the study counsellor, or equivalent person at your department, for information on the procedures for study support in your study programme. You must also show your NAIS certificate to your department in order to receive the support you have been granted.


What does the study support certificate
contain
?
Your
study support certificate in NAIS
contains
your personal details, an attachment
containing
information about who decides on your support
and
the student’s responsibilities. The certificate also shows what decisions on study support the coordinator has made for you and the recommendations the coordinator has made for your department or examiner to decide on.
The certificate does not say
what
kind of disability you have.
You choose whether you want to share that information with your teachers, for example.
Period of validity
Your NAIS certificate shows its period of validity. To renew the certificate, please contact your study support coordinator in
good time
before its expiry date.


NAIS is the system where you can apply for study support for your studies if you have a long-term disability. It is a national system used by all Swedish universities and higher education institutions. If you are studying at several universities, you need to make an application in NAIS for each of these universities. When you apply for study support at the University of Gothenburg, only the coordinators and mentor coordinator at the Educational Affairs unit can see the information you enter in NAIS.


The personal data we collect and process in NAIS are your name, Swedish personal identity number, contact details, disability, and other personal data from health care professionals’ certificates (certificates from doctors, speech therapists, etc.). We also process data about the faculty you are studying at and what study support you have been recommended and/or granted.
The processing is done in accordance with the General Data Protection Regulation (EU 2016/679) and other relevant data protection legislation.
Find out more about how the University of Gothenburg processes your personal data


As a student you are responsible for ensuring that your studies and your study situation work well.
Here are a few tips to keep in mind:
You are responsible for applying for study support in good time.
You are responsible for informing your department that you have been granted study support and for contacting the study counsellor or equivalent person to obtain information about procedures for study support in your programme or course.
At least four weeks before an invigilated written examination, you are responsible for reporting your needs for adjustments to the person advised by your department.
You are responsible for cancelling your seat booking for the exam if you are ill or are otherwise prevented from attending.
If you have been granted enhanced library service, you are responsible for presenting your study support certificate in NAIS to the Gothenburg University Library.
You are responsible for contacting your coordinator if you feel that other study support is needed in addition to what has been decided and recommended.
If you need continued mentor support, you are responsible for contacting the mentor coordinator again prior to the start of each semester.


What does not qualify you for study support
Please contact your department if you
:
for example, break a bone or require surgery during your studies. This also applies if your pregnancy is affecting your studies.
have questions concerning physical adaptations of premises and physical accessibility in the University’s premises.
For accessibility issues
regarding
transport to and from the University, housing, personal assistive
technologies
and personal
assistance
for example, please contact your municipality, region and
Försäkringskassan
(the Swedish Social Insurance Agency).
More support at the University


If you have a disability that makes reading printed text difficult, you can gain access to literature in accessible format.  To gain access to talking books, for example, you need to book a meeting with a librarian at the University Library. The librarian will help you apply for a Legimus account with the Swedish Agency for Accessible Media (MTM). Find out more about
who can gain access to talking books
on the Swedish Agency for Accessible Media’s website.
Services for people with reading disabilities on the University library website


At any time during your studies, you can download software to your computer that facilitates reading and writing.
More about Softwares for students with disabilities


Contact


If you have any questions or would like to talk about study support, the quickest way to reach us is by e-mail. You can also call us if you prefer that.
Please note.
The office for disability study support are currently experiencing longer processing times. Your application will be processed as soon as possible. Thank you for your patience.
Email
pedagogisktstod@gu.se
Phone hours
Monday, Tuesday and Friday 9.00-10.00
+46 31
786 69 00
Please note!
The phone hours are closed 7-8 September.


Contact
Find you way on the University
Faculties and departments
Security at the University
Processing of your personal data
Accessibility statement
Cookie settings