Books
The Craft of Research.
Booth, W. m. fl. (2016). Fourth ed., Chicago guides to writing, editing, and publishing. A hands-on guide for formulating a research question and writing an academic essay, whether a master's thesis or a paper for an undergraduate course.
Good Essay Writing: a Social Sciences Guide
. Redman, P. & Maples, W. (2017). Fifth ed., Sage study skills. This guide walks the reader through the basic ideas of writing in a social science context, from breaking down the task and responding to the question to structure, style and a number of other important things to think about in this field of writing.
English for Scientific Research: a Practical Guide to Good Science Writing
. Jansson, R. (2013). 1. uppl. ed. Studentlitteratur. This writing guide breaks down the basics of the IMRaD structure and includes a variety of tips concerning academic style in science writing including the perspective of each section, practical elements to be included, and language points to consider.
Art-Write: the Writing Guide for Visual Artists
:
Crafting Effective Artist Statements and Promotional Materials
.
Amorose, V. (2013). A hands-on working book that guides you through the process of writing an effective artist’s statement, as well as other materials such as press releases.
Writing Your Master's Thesis: from A to Zen
. Nygaard, L. (2017). This resource provides an in-depth explanation of writing a master's thesis from process to product, including explanations of the various sections and real life examples from master's students working through their own thesis projects.
Academic Writing for Graduate Students: Essential Tasks and Skills
.
Swales, J. & Feak, C. (2012). 3., [rev. and expanded] ed., Michigan series in English for academic & professional purposes. This is a resource providing descriptions, examples, and exercises regarding structural, stylistic, and grammatical advice for graduate-level texts.
They Say/I Say: the Moves that Matter in Academic Writing
.
Graff, G. & Birkenstein, C. (2017). Third edition, 2016 MLA update. ed.. This resource connects academic language concepts of structure and content with functional templates to use directly in student texts. It is especially useful for helping separate reported ideas from sources and your own ideas as a writer.
Academic Writing: a Handbook for International Students
.
Bailey, S. (2015). 4.th ed.. This is an introduction with exercises to the elements and tasks involved in academic writing, including the process of writing, structure, referencing, and academic language choices for vocabulary and grammatical elements.


Dictionaries and thesauri
Academic Phrasebank
(Manchester) is an online resource bank that offers templates for creating statements that both reflect the necessary moves in academic writing and offer clear grammatical sentences with academic language.
Online Collocation Dictionary
(Oxford) is an online dictionary that can help identify words that go together, such as which preposition to use in a given context, or which adjectives go with which nouns. Includes a general definition, word class, and a listing of words commonly used together with the searched word with examples.
Academic Word List
(UEFAP) is an extensive list of words used in academic writing, including forms in different word classes (for example the differences in noun, verb, and adjective forms) and definitions. Recommended for writers hoping to sound more academic.


Language and Writing Guides
The Purdue Online Writing Lab (OWL)
provides links to topics dealing with all stages of the writing process from pre-writing to formulating a thesis to proofreading. A good place to start when beginning a paper or to find inspiration when unsure where to go next.
The Essay Format (Lund University)
gives a short description and video highlighting the main elements of a basic academic essay, including introduction, body, and conclusion. A good resource for beginning to organize your general ideas into a more formal text.


Learn more about generative AI by these recorded webinars on GU Play:
Generative AI and university studies
Generative AI and academic writing
Generative AI and academic reading
Generative AI and critical thinking
Three reasons not to use generative AI


Contact
Find you way on the University
Faculties and departments
Security at the University
Processing of your personal data
Accessibility statement
Cookie settings