At times, it can feel difficult to distance yourself from your writing to see what is actually there and evaluate its strengths and weaknesses objectively. One way to achieve this distance is to set aside your text and revisit it later. This distance will give you a fresh perspective on your text and will help you revise it.
Checklist


Review the instructions for the writing assignment. Check that the text answers the questions asked and complies with the formal requirements specified. This will help you find out if anything is missing and needs to be supplemented or if there is content that is not relevant and can be deleted.
Examine the statements and reasoning that your text presents. Are they well substantiated? That is, do you refer to relevant sources? Review your sources and make sure they are credible and used correctly.


Ensure the text has a clear introduction, body, and conclusion. Review the paragraph division. Is the content divided into reasonably long paragraphs? Do the passages come in a logical order so that the reader can follow the reasoning of the text? Is it clear what the main idea is in each paragraph?


Think about how the transitions work between the different sections of the text. Are there connections that need to be written for the reader to understand how the text's reasoning is connected? Does the text contain conjunctions?


Make sure you use definitions and terms consistently. That is, use the same words for the same thing in the text. Additionally, ensure the content of the text is clear so that the reader does not have to think about what or whom a word is referring to.
Ask yourself: Are there long and complicated sentences that can make the text difficult to read and understand? Does the text become clearer if you divide these sentences or reformulate yourself? Are there formulations that can be perceived as vague, spoken, or evaluative? If yes, how can you express yourself more clearly?


Proofread your text before submitting it:
Be careful when doing your own reading, even if you use programs that check spelling in the document.
Try printing and reading the text on paper. Then it may be easier to detect misspellings and ambiguities.
Try reading passages aloud to yourself or ask someone else to read them to you.
Double-check any words in the text that you are uncertain about to ensure both proper spelling and usage.
Review the references in the text again and check that they are written correctly. Also, make sure that in-text references match the references in your reference list.


A concrete way to get a reader's view of the text is to ask someone to read it and provide feedback. To evaluate the clarity and coherence of your writing, consider asking a friend, family member, or colleague to read your text and provide feedback. Even a brief review of a few paragraphs can offer valuable insight into the flow and comprehensibility of your work.
Peer response is incorporated as a teaching method in some courses. This allows students to read each other's texts, provide feedback, and discuss possible improvements. This is something that you can do yourself with some of your classmates. Peer response is a way to help each other develop both as writers and critical readers.


Paragraphing and topic sentences
Paragraphing is an important tool to show the reader how the content of your text is organised and structured. A common recommendation for paragraph organisation is usually summarised with the expression ‘one paragraph, one idea’. This means that each paragraph in the text should deal with one main idea or point.
A topic sentence in a paragraph is a sentence that conveys the main idea of that particular paragraph. The topic sentence often comes first and is then usually followed by explanations, examples, or arguments that develop this main idea.
When you work to improve the structure of your text, the content can appear clearer not only to a reader but even to you as a writer. For example, you can see if your argument needs to be strengthened or if the text needs to be supplemented.


A reverse outline is a method that can be used to revise and improve the structure of a text. This is what you can do:
Start by highlighting the topic sentence (or main point) of each paragraph of your text. Then write out the topic sentences on a new blank document.
Review the contents of this new document. Is everything connected to the subject? Is it in the right order? Are there any repetitions?
Make a new outline of the topic sentences in the new document by organising them differently if needed. Then go back to the original text and edit based on your new outline by:
making sure that each paragraph relates to the topic you are writing about
removing content that is not relevant to your text
placing the paragraphs in a more logical order
combining paragraphs that contain the same point
splitting the paragraphs that contain several main points into one paragraph per point
removing unnecessary repetitions
formulating new topic sentences where needed.


Common thread and linking words
A text with a common thread has a structure that is easy to follow. A common thread clarifies how different ideas relate to each other and facilitates understanding.
One way to create a common thread is to use conjunctions. Some examples of conjunctions are first, then, then, therefore, however, for example, consequently and finally. There are many connection words that allow you to specify the connection you want to convey.
Before submission
When you feel your text is finished, there are usually a few things left to do. Spelling mistakes and ambiguities can be difficult to detect in a text you have written yourself. But for the reader, even small errors can be disturbing, and if there are several errors in a text, a reader can begin to doubt the writer's credibility.
Typing errors can be easier to detect if you print your text and read it, line by line. A trick can be to change the font, colour, or style of the text to get a fresh look at it. If you have the opportunity, you can try copying your text into different spell-checking programs since they can detect different spelling errors.
You can also try reading the text aloud or asking someone else to read it to you. You can have the text read out loud with the help of reading and writing tools that you, as a student at the University of Gothenburg, can download and use free of charge.


References and reading tips
Karlsson, O., & Språkrådet. (2017).
Svenska skrivregler
(Fjärde upplagan ed., Språkrådets skrifter;22).
Strömquist, S (2019).
Uppsatshandboken: Råd och regler för utformningen av examensarbeten och vetenskapliga uppsatser
. Studentlitteratur.


Learn more about generative AI by these recorded webinars on GU Play:
Generative AI and university studies
Generative AI and academic writing
Generative AI and academic reading
Generative AI and critical thinking
Three reasons not to use generative AI


Do you want to practice and develop your knowledge of Swedish? In the Language and grammar resource on Canvas, you can read about important language and grammar skills and take quizzes.
Practice Swedish language and grammar in Canvas


Contact
Find you way on the University
Faculties and departments
Security at the University
Processing of your personal data
Accessibility statement
Cookie settings