Research & Innovation Services
The Research & Innovation Services is the University of Gothenburg's support for utilization and innovations. They can give you support to further develop you own ideas, but also, you can participate in the process to help others develop their ideas.
Develop your own idea further
Do you have an idea or knowledge that you have worked on during your education at the University of Gothenburg, that you wish to develop further? The Research & Innovation Services can provide advice and is happy to explore ideas with you. How can you best formulate your idea in order to gain interest? What is the goal and what do you want? What is the next step to take so that the idea develops in the direction you want? What do you need to be able to take that step?
Contact information for the Research & Innovation Services
If you have any questions, please contact Camilla Pettersson
Help others develop their ideas
If you don't have your own idea but want to contribute to and work in innovation processes, you can assist in developing others' ideas. The Research & Innovation Services also run something called Research Impact Studio. There, you have the opportunity to, based on your field of study and your interests, become a part of a team that develops ideas and knowledge resources from the University, often stemming from ongoing research.
If you are interested in Research Impact Studio, please contact ris@gu.se


Drivhuset Gothenburg
Drivhuset helps students and others advance their ideas. They offer guidance, concrete methods, tools and a network of contacts. Regardless of where you are in your process, you are welcome to  contact Drivhuset for free advice.
Drivhuset's website


Venture Cup - a competition for business ideas
Venture Cup offers tomorrow's entrepreneurs inspiration, education, mentoring and the opportunity to build a solid network. If you have an idea, they can connect you with experts from the business world. They annually organize the competitions IDEA and STARTUP, as well asmore temporary challenges. They also offer the evening course Affärsplanering för tillväxtföretag (in Swedish) in collaboration with the University of Gothenburg.
Venture Cup's website
Course: Affärsplanering för tillväxtföretag (in Swedish)


Contact
Find you way on the University
Faculties and departments
Security at the University
Processing of your personal data
Accessibility statement
Cookie settings