Swedish language courses at five levels
Learning Swedish not only enriches your experience of Swedish culture and society, but also plays a significant role when seeking employment in Sweden. The university offers courses at multiple levels – from true beginner courses (A1 level) to more advanced ones (B2 level). Read more about the courses and how to apply below.


Course descriptions
Our courses largely follow the European standardized levels for language teaching outlined in the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages
(CEFR)
The courses are ten weeks long, except for the fifth course, which is slightly longer. In most cases, there is one class session per week. Between sessions, students are expected to complete homework and assignments according to the teacher's instructions.


This is a beginner-level Swedish course which includes pronunciation exercises, reading, speaking practice, basic grammar and short writing exercises. After completing the course, you should have basic knowledge of Swedish – partly at the A1 level in accordance with the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages.
Please note that this course does not require any previous knowledge of Swedish at all.


This is a Swedish course intended for students with knowledge of Swedish equivalent to the content of Basic Swedish 1. Students will improve their language proficiency and broaden their knowledge of grammar, pronunciation and vocabulary. After completing the course, you should have basic knowledge of Swedish that covers the A1 and some parts of the A2 level in accordance with the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages.


This is a Swedish course intended for students with knowledge of Swedish equivalent to the content of Basic Swedish 2 – level A1/A2. Students will further improve their language proficiency and broaden their knowledge of grammar, pronunciation and vocabulary. After completing the course, you should have knowledge of Swedish at A2 level in accordance with the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages.


This is a Swedish course intended for students with knowledge of Swedish equivalent to the content of Basic Swedish 3 – level A2. Basic Swedish 4 is the first course in a two-part course package, focusing on the independent language learner and the development and usage of more advanced language skills. Students will further improve their language proficiency and broaden their knowledge of grammar, pronunciation and vocabulary. After completing the course, you should have knowledge of Swedish at the B1 level in accordance with the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages.


This is a Swedish course intended for students with knowledge of Swedish equivalent to the content of Basic Swedish 4 – level B1. Basic Swedish 5 is the second course in a two-part course package, focusing on the independent language learner and the development and usage of more advanced language skills. Students will further improve their language proficiency and broaden their knowledge of grammar, pronunciation and vocabulary. After completing the course, you should have knowledge of Swedish at the B2 level in accordance with the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages.


Course literature
In Basic Swedish 1–3, we use the textbook
Rivstart
A1/A2 (2023). Right from the start, it is required to have both the book titled 'Textbok' and the one titled 'Övningsbok' (English: exercise book). In Basic Swedish 4 and 5, the textbook
Svenska för internationella akademiker
(2023) is used.
•    Levy Scherrer, Paula & Karl Lindemalm 2023.
Rivstart A1/A2 Textbok.
3 ed. Stockholm: Natur & Kultur.
•    Blomström, Vendela & Eva Nobel 2023.
Svenska för internationella akademiker.
Lund:  Studentlitteratur.
The required literature can be borrowed from the university
library
or purchased from various retailers. Unfortunately, there is no longer any bookstore in Gothenburg offering a wide selection of course literature. However, there are several major Swedish online bookstores available, such as
Adlibris
and
Bokus
. Another option is to look for used books. There are several companies and online platforms that facilitate the buying and selling of books and course literature, including
Antikvariat.net
,
Bokbörsen
,
Campusbokhandeln
,
Studentapan
, and
Tradera
.


Admission and application
Each semester is divided into two 10-week course periods, making it possible to take two courses in the same semester – for example, Basic Swedish 1 followed by Basic Swedish 2 –depending on course availability. The admission is open a certain period in February, May, October, and December. The dates for the next admission period are listed below.


Period 2 (November 4 - January 17)
Basic Swedish 1, Campus, 18:00-21:00, Mondays
Basic Swedish 1, Campus, 18:00-21:00, Wednesdays
Basic Swedish 1, Campus, 15:15-18:00, Tuesdays
Basic Swedish 2, Campus, 15:15-18:00, Thursdays
Basic Swedish 4, Campus, 18:00-21:00, Thursdays


Before applying you must determine your Swedish language level:
New students with prior Swedish knowledge should take our
Online placement test
to find the right course level based on the CEFR scale (Common European Framework of Reference for languages). The result will guide you in your choice of course. Scroll down for more information and examples of how to analyse and interpret the results.
If you're new to Swedish, you should apply for Basic Swedish 1.
If you have already taken and passed one of our courses of Basic Swedish, simply apply for the next course.


Spots are allocated on a first-come, first-served basis, so it's advisable to apply early when admission opens. We will notify you after the admission period ends to confirm your course placement. Admission to one course doesn't guarantee a spot in the next level. You must apply separately for each level you wish to attend.
When the admission is open, you apply via a link under 'Application' below. Provide your student email address from the
university
when you apply. The email address is used to link you to the course's Canvas page. If you haven't received a student email yet, use a private email address, and we'll contact you in case you get a spot in the course.
Apply here
Before applying, carefully review course descriptions and determine your language level.
The registration to period 2 in the autumn semester opens on October 6 at 10:00 am on the links that will appear below.


Online placement test
If you are a new student with prior knowledge of Swedish, take our online placement test to assess your language level and find a suitable course. The test takes approximately one hour to complete. Once you start, you have 48 hours to finish it, and you can pause at any time during this period. Make sure you are in a calm environment with a stable internet connection, and use a modern computer with an updated web browser. Also, check your audio settings since the test includes a listening section.
Online placement test
Interpret the results of the placement test
After completing the placement test, you will see your Swedish language level according to the CEFR scale. It is then up to you to analyse and interpret your results and, based on them, choose the most suitable Basic Swedish course. To help you, we have provided a few examples of how to interpret the results and select the right course.
If you are still uncertain which course to take, please reach out to our coordinator for further consultation (
basic.swedish@svenska.gu.se
).


Based on example 1, we recommend that you choose Basic Swedish 2, in order to continue acquiring language skills at the A2 level.
Image


Based on Example 2, we recommend that you choose Basic Swedish 3 in order to achieve the A2 goals in each category by the end of the course.
Image


Based on example 3, we recommend that you choose Basic Swedish 2 and begin developing your language skills at the A2 level.
Image


Based on example 4, we recommend that you choose Basic Swedish 4 and continue developing your language skills at the B1 level.
Image


After completed courses
The courses do not provide credits, but students who have met the compulsory requirements and attended at least 80% of the course will be awarded a certificate.


FAQ
General questions


The courses are organized by the Department of Swedish, Multilingualism, Language Technology on behalf of the University of Gothenburg.


There are several options both within and outside the university. Here are some suggestions for courses and programs offered by various educational providers.
University of Gothenburg:
SW1703 Preparatory course in Swedish as a Foreign Language for University Studies (B2)
;
SW1705 Qualifying course in Swedish as a Foreign
Language for University Studies (C1)
Folkuniversitetet:
A wide range of courses up to C1 level
Gothenburg municipality,
komvux:
Swedish as a second language (up to C1)
Qualifying tests: Swedex (B1, B2 and C1)
and
Tisus
(C1)


Application and eligibility


To enroll in a Basic Swedish course, you must be admitted to and registered for another course at the University of Gothenburg during the same semester and have an active student account. However, it is possible to apply for a Basic Swedish course before your student account has been activated.


Yes, the eligibility requirements are the same for all courses, and as long as you are a student at the University of Gothenburg, you can be admitted to a course at any level.


You apply for the courses directly online on the Student Portal. The period for application is open in February, May, October, and December.


If you have no prior knowledge of Swedish, you should apply for Basic Swedish 1. If you have some knowledge of Swedish, we recommend taking our
placement test online
to determine your level.


Unfortunately, we cannot offer a spot to all applicants because the funding from the university limited. The available spots are allocated on a first-come, first-served basis.


No, we have chosen not to use waiting lists. Instead, we admit more students in the regular admission.


No, we generally do not allow students to switch between courses because the number of spots in each course is limited, and all courses are usually fully booked.


No, you must actively apply for the courses you want to take. We do not offer a spot guarantee.


No, the courses are only available to students at the University of Gothenburg. Chalmers offers certain international students Swedish language courses. Learn more about the options offered by Chalmers
here
.


Classes and more


Most courses are campus-based and take place at Humanisten, Renströmsgatan 6.


The schedule (TimeEdit) is linked from the course page on Canvas. In most courses, there is one class per week.


Yes, it can usually be solved. Speak with your teacher and contact the coordinator (basic.swedish@svenska.gu.se).


The general answer is no, as you are expected to attend in person. However, it is up to the teacher to decide.


Results, credits and certificates


No, but you will receive a certificate upon completion of a course. Certificates will be issued to students who have participated in at least 80% of the course, and completed all mandatory assignments.


Yes, to a large extent.


Follow the course as best as you can by keeping up with instructions provided by the teacher on Canvas. It is also recommended that you inform the teacher. Please note that an attendance rate of 80% is required to receive a course certificate.


Contact


Basic Swedish for international students
basic.swedish@svenska.gu.se


Contact
Find you way on the University
Faculties and departments
Security at the University
Processing of your personal data
Accessibility statement
Cookie settings